Measuring stack usage (#316)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/measuring-stack-usage.md

{% include newsletter.html %}

{% include toc.html %}

## How stacks work

Before we dive into the measurement techniques, let's take a quick look at how
stacks usually behave on these types of small embedded chips (skip to
["Measuring stack usage"](#measuring-stack-usage) if this is old news). For this
article, we'll be assuming an ARM Cortex-M embedded device with "full
descending" stacks, but similar techniques will apply to other systems.

### Stack grows down, heap grows up

In a "full descending" stack, objects are "allocated" into stack memory in
decreasing memory order.

If our code is allocating a 32-bit value on stack:

```c

int foo(int a) {
  uint32_t var;  // the compiler may choose to allocate this on stack
  ...
}
```

First the "stack pointer" is decremented by 32 bits (4 bytes), then the address
for `var` is set to the new stack pointer address. Loads and stores of the `var`
variable will then access the stack-allocated 32-bit region.

In a typical single-threaded embedded program that uses both stack and heap
(`malloc` and friends), the memory ordering might look like this:

![](/img/stacks/stack-growth.excalidraw.svg)

You can find some more explanation here:

> <https://courses.engr.illinois.edu/cs225/fa2022/resources/stack-heap/>

Reviewer: ❤️ for my alma mater

> Side note, there's an interesting strategy for single-threaded programs that
> involves a two-pass linking step, and results in this memory layout:
>
> ![](/img/stacks/stack-growth-double-link.excalidraw.svg)
>
> Read more about that here:
>
> <https://blog.japaric.io/stack-overflow-protection/>

### RTOS stacks

> ![](/img/stacks/rtos-stacks.excalidraw.svg)

Author: Fix diagram, task->thread

usage by examining the highest location in the stack not set to the known value
(aka "high watermark").

![](/img/stacks/stack-painting.excalidraw.png)

Both FreeRTOS and Zephyr RTOS apply this technique for measuring stack usage at
runtime:

- FreeRTOS: <https://www.freertos.org/uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark.html>
- Zephyr RTOS:
  <https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/kconfig.html#CONFIG_INIT_STACKS>

Here's a short example of how this works in practice:

```c
#include <stdint.h>

#define STACK_FILL_VALUE 0xaa

// Helper function to initialize a stack with the fill pattern
void stack_initialize_fill_value(uintptr_t stack_top, size_t stack_size) {
  memset((void *)stack_top, STACK_FILL_VALUE, stack_size);
}

// Function to return the maximum stack usage
uintptr_t stack_high_watermark(uintptr_t stack_top, size_t stack_size) {
  uint8_t *stack = (uint8_t *)stack_top;
  uint8_t *stack_end = (uint8_t *)(stack_top + stack_size);

  // To compute the stack usage, iterate over the stack memory and find the
  // highest location that doesn't match the fill value
  while (stack < stack_end && *stack == STACK_FILL_VALUE) {
    stack++;
  }

  return (uintptr_t)stack;
}
```

> This strategy can be used after the system has run significant pieces of its
> functionality, to give a reasonably accurate measurement of the maximum stack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this strategy after the system executes core functionality to collect a reasonably
accurate measurement of the maximum stack usage.
```

usage.

_Note: since this approach relies on values being written to the stack, if a

> buffer is allocated on stack but only partially used, the full buffer size

Reviewer: ```suggestion
buffer is allocated on the stack but only partially used, the full buffer size
```

> wouldn't be immediately represented in the fill pattern._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will not be counted as used. Any memory still containing the fill pattern will be counted as unused_
```

        sp_min = sp
    # the full implementation exits this loop when hitting a breakpoint
    if hit_breakpoint():
      break
print("Min SP: 0x{:08x}".format(sp_min))
print("Delta SP: {}".format(sp_start - sp_min))
```

The script is _very slow_ to run since it interrupts program flow at every
instruction, but it gives a very accurate result.

It can be enhanced to produce more data, for example recording the max usage for
each frame in a call stack:

```python
# write the verbose data to a file
with open("stack_usage.log", "w") as f:
    sp_min = 0xFFFFFFFF
    current_function = None
    current_function_max_su = 0
    while True:
        gdb.execute("si")
        sp = int(gdb.parse_and_eval("$sp"))
        su = sp_start - sp
        name = gdb.selected_frame().name()
        # if we just changed function name, record the high water mark
        # from the last function
        if current_function is not None and name != current_function:
            f.write(f"{current_function}|{current_function_max_su}\n")
            current_function_max_su = 0
        current_function = name
        if su > current_function_max_su:
            current_function_max_su = su

>         # f.write(f"{current_function}|{current_function_max_su}\n")

Reviewer: Should this be uncommented?

Author: ah that was for debug, good spot! deleting it

        # from the last function
        if current_function is not None and name != current_function:
            f.write(f"{current_function}|{current_function_max_su}\n")
            current_function_max_su = 0
        current_function = name
        if su > current_function_max_su:
            current_function_max_su = su
        # f.write(f"{current_function}|{current_function_max_su}\n")
        if sp < sp_min:
            sp_min = sp
        # check if we've reached a breakpoint
        if hit_breakpoint:
            print("Hit breakpoint at 0x{:08x}".format(pc))
            break
    f.write(f"{current_function}|{current_function_max_su}\n")
```

Plotting that usage can be interesting:

```bash
# using the 'plotext' python library to plot the raw trace data on the terminal
# https://github.com/piccolomo/plotext
❯ cut -d \| -f 2 sp-all.trace | \
     python -c 'import plotext as plt; import sys; \
       data = [int(x.strip()) for x in sys.stdin.readlines()]; \
       plt.plot(data, marker="hd"); \
       plt.title("Stack Usage"); \
       plt.plot_size(80,25); \
       plt.theme("pro"); \
       plt.show()'

                                     Stack Usage

>      ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐

Author: this renders so badly on mobile SIGH. replace with png :(.
![image](https://github.com/memfault/interrupt/assets/2538614/1c4fafee-dc18-4ab1-880e-253ee28113cf)

Author: sigh switched to gnuplot too. RIP my one-liner.
